.\" SPDX-FileCopyrightInfo: Copyright © 2013-2015 Oliver Sander
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: FSFAP
.\"
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH DUNECONTROL 1 "November 8, 2016"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
dunecontrol \- Control program for the Dune build system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dunecontrol
[\fIOPTIONS\fP] \fICOMMANDS\fP [\fICOMMAND-OPTIONS\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dunecontrol
is the control program for the build system of the Dune libraries.

The Dune libraries form a set of modules.  Each can be built independently using CMake.
Additionally, though, there are dependencies between modules,
which are expected to form a directed acyclic graph.  These dependencies are set in a
file called
.B dune.module
contained in the main directory of each Dune module.

The
.B dunecontrol
program helps to build sets of inter-dependent modules.  It allows to construct
the entire dependency graph and obtain information about it.  Then it allows to run various build-related
commands for all modules.  These are executed in the order mandated by the dependency graph.

.SH COMMANDS
Colon-separated list of commands. Available commands are:
.HP
.B help
.IP
Show a help message and exit
.HP
.B print
.IP
Print the list of modules sorted according to their dependency relations
.HP
.B info
.IP
Same as `print', but including whether it is a dependency or suggestion
.HP
.B printdeps
.IP
Print recursive dependencies of a module
.HP
.B vcsetup
.IP
Setup version control repository (Git etc.) or working copy (SVN)
.HP
.B update
.IP
Update all modules from the repository from their respective version control systems
.HP
.B configure
.IP
Run cmake for each module
.HP
.B make
.IP
Run make for each module
.HP
.B all
.IP
Run the 'configure' and 'make' commands for each module
.HP
.B exec
.IP
Execute an arbitrary command in each module source directory
.HP
.B bexec
.IP
Execute an arbitrary command in each module build directory
.HP
.B status
.IP
Show version control status for each module
.HP
.B svn
.IP
Run svn command for each svn-managed module
.HP
.B git
.IP
Run git command for each git-managed module
.HP
.B export
.IP
Run eval `dunecontrol export` to save the list of dune.module files to the DUNE_CONTROL_PATH variable
.SH OPTIONS
.HP
\fB\-h\fP, \fB\-\-help\fP
.IP
Show this help
.HP
\fB--debug\fP
.IP
Run with debugging output enabled
.HP
\fB--module=\fP\fImod\fP
.IP
Apply the actions on module
.I mod
and all modules it depends on
.HP
\fB--only=\fP\fImod\fP
.IP
Only apply the actions on module
.I mod
, but not on the modules it depends on
.HP
\fB--current\fP
.IP
Only apply the actions on the current module, the one whose source tree we are in
.HP
\fB--current-dep\fP
.IP
Apply the actions on the current module, and all modules it depends on
.HP
\fB--resume\fP
.IP
Resume a previous run (only consider the modules not built successfully on the previous run)
.HP
\fB--skipfirst\fP
.IP
Skip the first module (use with --resume)
.HP
\fB--skipversioncheck\fP
.IP
When looking for Dune modules, do not check whether they have the required versions
.HP
\fB--opts=\fP\fIfile\fP
.IP
Load default options from \fIfile\fP, for details see the section
below.

Instead of a command line parameter, it is also possible to define an
environment variable \fIDUNE_OPTS_FILE\fP.
.HP
\fB--builddir=\fP\fIname\fP
.IP
Make out-of-source builds in a subdir \fIname\fP.

If \fIname\fP is a relative path, this directory is created inside each
module, if it is an absolute path, a subdirectory for each
module is created inside.

Instead of a command line parameter, it is also possible to define an
environment variable \fIDUNE_BUILDDIR\fP (see below) or to specify a
\fIBUILDDIR\fP variable in the opts file.
.HP
\fB--[COMMAND]-opts=\fP\fIopts\fP
.IP
Set options for COMMAND (this is mainly useful for the 'all' COMMAND)

.SH OPTS FILE

The options file contains different entries to specify the build
environment, e.g. which compiler to use, which options to pass to
cmake, where to build DUNE, etc.

Variables are

.HP
\fDUNE_CONTROL_PATH\fP
.IP
just as the environment variable DUNE_CONTROL_PATH, it is possible to
define it in the options file. For details see the description below.

.HP
\fBBUILDDIR\fP=\Ifname\fP
.IP
to specify the build directory, just as via the command line.
Defining the build directory in the opts file, allows to easily switch
between different build directories for different DUNE configurations.

.HP
\fB[COMMAND]_FLAGS\fP=\fIopts\fP
.IP
Set options for \fICOMMAND\fP, e.g. CMAKE_FLAGS, to specify parameters
passed to the specific command. In case of cmake this might look as
follows

CMAKE_FLAGS="-DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=g++-14 -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS='-fPIC -g -O3' -DFOO_PREFIX=/path/to/libfoo"

In case of make a common use case is to enable concurrency, e.g.

MAKE_FLAGS="-j4"

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

.HP
.B DUNE_CONTROL_PATH
.IP
Colon-separated list to specify where
.B dunecontrol
searches for Dune modules.
Entries are either directories, which are then used recursively for
.B dune.module
files or the user can directly specify the full path to specific
dune.module files.
.IP
.B default:
The default for the case that DUNE_CONTROL_PATH is empty is to search
the current directory, its subdirectories and a system-wide installation in /usr.

.HP
.B DUNE_OPTS_FILE
.IP
Specify a default value for an options file, if the user does not
specify the --opts= parameter on the commandline.

.HP
.B DUNE_BUILDIR
.IP
Specify a default value for an build directory, if the user does not
specify the --builddir= parameter on the commandline.

.SH AUTHOR
Dune was written by the Dune team (https://www.dune-project.org/community/people).
.PP
This manual page was written by Oliver Sander and Christian Engwer.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification,
are permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright
notice and this notice are preserved.  This file is offered as-is,
without any warranty.
